California, by just about any metric, is
a powerhouse. But it's also a state with
an inherent and perhaps fatal flaw. Just
look at the state's longest waterway and
its two terminal reservoirs. These two
fairly modest human-made lakes mark the
end of the state's most important and
most complicated water system and signal
the major disconnect that defines
California, that most of its people live
where the water isn't. Of California's
58 counties, just these four alone, home
to Los Angeles and San Diego, contain
about 19 million Californians, half the
people in just 10% of the area. This
relatively young mega region caught up
to the historically dominant San
Francisco over the past century. Rail
connections linked the area to the rest
of the nation, projects to establish the
ports of Long Beach and Los Angeles
connected it to global trade, fissures
in the ground brought oil bubbling to
the surface, World War II brought about
a regional aerospace boom, but a base
reality underlies it all. Southern
California boomed because it was simply
an an unbeatable place to live. Whether
it was boosters on the LA Times
editorial board, postcard artists,
railroads looking to sell property and
up ridership, Midwesterners convincing
family to follow them, or sanatoriums
selling their services to sick urbanites
spread across the states, Southern
California has always sold the fact that
it has plenty of sunshine, pleasant
temperatures, and a generally hospitable
climate for living and growing. It's an
image that has been maintained in
popular culture, it's an idea that
locals swear by today, and it's a view
that's hard to argue against. By daily
mean temperature, Los Angeles' coldest
month only differs from its hottest by
16° Fahrenheit or 9° Celsius. It's as if
the area doesn't have seasons, and with
the ocean nearby helping to regulate,
it's just never too terribly hot and
never quite cold. And it's always sunny,
as the city cites and sells the number
263 as the average [music] count of
sunny days a year. It's just about a
perfect place to live. But boosterism
has a way of turning alluring
characteristics into cartoonish
oversimplifications. What doesn't come
up in talks as to how many sunny days
there are is the downside linked to this
lack of cloud cover, a lack of water.
By annual precipitation, neither San
Diego nor Los Angeles are considered
deserts, but as semi-arid Mediterranean
climates, they're not far off, either.
San Diego proper receives just about 10
in of rain a year, while Los Angeles is
nearer to about 12 to 15. New York City,
for comparison, receives about 42 to 49
in of precipitation in a year, and
London, 23 to 25. With the Southern
Californian cities both in the shadow of
nearby mountains, available water is
aided by some 30 in of annual
precipitation in the Cuyamaca and Laguna
mountains, and 33 to 50 in in the San
Gabriel mountains. Much of this water,
though, is absorbed into park soil or is
flushed through first steep and rocky
terrain, then a dizzying and dirty array
of concrete structures that whisk
increasingly tainted water to the
Pacific [music] in the name of flood
protection. All this leaves Southern
California's urban and suburban
population high and dry when it comes to
access [music] to local water. But, both
had timing on their side as both were
coming of age at the height of America's
belief that it could simply engineer
solutions to the problems nature
presented.
Today, the San Diego and Los Angeles
metro areas rely on three major water
infrastructure networks, two of which
they share, and all of which pull water
through the hybrid, partly natural,
partly engineered water procurement
systems that each represented the
furthest reach of American ingenuity of
the time. The oldest of such system
serves solely LA and is called the Los
Angeles Aqueduct.
>> [music]
>> It's gravity fed, more than a century
old, and still central to LA's water
mix. It was a development that was shady
from the start, involving quiet,
misleading negotiation tactics, as well
as a misrepresented and overstated need
for further water resources spearheaded
by the city's chief engineer. Once
running, it was responsible for one of
California's largest lakes, Owens,
drying up entirely, leading the valley's
locals to attempt to sabotage the
project, drying out their farmland and
ruining their way of life. At 230 mi or
370 km long, with more than 160 tunnels
and exact grading [music] throughout to
maintain a gravity-fed flow, it was
considered as complex a project as the
Panama Canal. It long ago dried out much
of the Owens Valley, but it still
remains a central story informing the
divide and distress between urban and
rural California, and it still keeps
moving water. Though, it's now far from
the most impressive project quenching
Southern California.
Newer and more complex is this system,
the Colorado River Aqueduct. Designed by
a collection of growing municipalities
that came together to form the
Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California in the late 1920s, and
constructed as a Great Depression era
public works project in the '30s, the
Colorado River Aqueduct begins at the
state's border, pulling water from Lake
Havasu. But, what makes Lake Havasu a
good spot to dam the Colorado River for
the ninth time is also what makes it
hard to get water out of, the fact that
the area is surrounded by steep canyon
terrain. So, engineers devised this, the
Whitsett Intake Pumping Plant, which
through nine separate pumps pushes the
incipient aqueduct uphill to the Gene
Wash Reservoir, about a mile away. But,
it's just the beginning. This human
river needs to cross a lot more
mountainous desert landscape. From here,
another set of pumps, another lift. This
one about 300 ft or 90 m to another
reservoir. The pattern continues.
Another pump here to clear the Iron
Mountains, and another two here and here
to clear the Eagle Mountains before it
reaches its high point. From above, the
aqueduct looks more or less like a
river, but the side profile tells a
different story.
>> [music]
>> It's a river running uphill before
finally reaching a high point and
flowing down into the thirsty
metropolitan areas of LA and San Diego.
[music]
Capable of hydrating a medium-sized city
by itself, the river running uphill was
recognized in 1952 as one of the seven
engineering marvels of the US alongside
the Panama Canal, Hoover Dam, and Empire
State Building.
Then, there's the most recent project,
the 1960s State Water Project. An 8-hour
or 500-mile 800-km drive up I-5 from LA
sits Lake Oroville. It's the reservoir
where low water marks make the news in
periods [music] of mega drought like
2021, and spillway failure makes the
news in especially wet years like 2017.
Its job is to regulate the flow of the
Sacramento River by providing
supplemental high Sierra snowmelt,
effectively taming [music] and
mechanizing the wild waterway. After
navigating the natural path of the
Sacramento, water then makes its way
into the Clifton Court Forebay before
flowing down to another pump station
that pushes water into the California
Aqueduct. Here, the water that started
as Sierra snow begins a 444-mile journey
replete with forks, additional pumping
stations, and reservoirs that disperse
the water to farmers, [music] smaller
urban areas, and eventually to Southern
California. Transporting water from the
northern to southern half of one of the
biggest states, [music] the aqueduct
alone is the longest single waterway in
California.
Through these massive engineering
projects, Southern California, with the
expertise and funding from local, state,
and federal government bodies, has
effectively engineered away the region's
biggest problem. They may not look
natural, lined with concrete, flowing
through tunnels, pushed upward through
pipes, but Southern California today has
ample waterways. They're reliable and
relied upon. LA receives about 88% of
its water from three aqueducts. While
San Diego counts on the Colorado River
and the California Aqueduct for about
80% of [music] its water. And strictly
from a technical perspective, these
systems have the sheer capacity to meet
present demand and even keep pace with
population growth.
And yet, [music] Southern California,
and all of California really, is in a
perpetual water crunch.
The problem doesn't stem from the
plumbing, but rather the accounting. In
the American West, where it generally
doesn't rain very often or very much,
farmers, towns, and super cities rely on
pulling water from snowmelt that has
trickled into rivers and creeks. The
miners, homesteaders, ranchers, and
territorial judicial systems realized
quickly that for Western [music]
expansion to work, they need some rules
on how exactly to share a public
resource that's hard to come by and
geographically constrained to channels
spread haphazardly across the landscape.
Ultimately, they settled on a
first-come, first-serve system called
prior appropriation. It works like this.
Let's say someone, or a collection of
someones, claimed water rights from this
river and built a ditch to cut that
water from the waterway way back in
1901, and ever [music] since counted on
that water to grow their crops. Should
no one have an earlier claim, their
rights are the most senior. Of course,
[music] they don't need all the river's
water, so let's say 3 years later, a
group of farmers come together just
upriver to build a ditch that siphons
off some water here. Well, they can do
this upriver of the senior rights holder
so long as their diversion doesn't
impact the more senior diversion
downriver. This, in theory, goes on and
on up and down the river until every
last drop is accounted for. But critical
in this system is who gets cut off first
should the river have a down year. In
this scenario, the most recent claim, or
the most junior water rights, get cut
[music] off first. And if it got to this
extreme of a situation, if there was
only enough water for one of these two
claims, the one made in 1901 would
predate the one made in 1904, [music]
and this group's ditch would receive its
water.
Now, in reality, both these systems, the
Imperial Irrigation District and the
Palo Verde Irrigation District, are some
of the most senior rights holders on the
entire Colorado River, so all the users
upriver from them, and there are a ton,
have to make sure water gets to them, or
they make a deal to make up for the
cuts.
The existence of this system is
important for California because it
first dictates that seniority is the
rule of the land, and [music] second,
that to maintain these systems, the
state needs a ballpark understanding of
how much water nature produces, and how
much water is going to run down a river
each year. This introduces two problems.
For the big urban areas, seniority is
always going to be an issue because
cities naturally sprout up later than
homesteads, ranches, and farms. Another
issue, nature is messy. Water is
difficult to measure accurately with
soil absorption rates, groundwater
pooling, and evaporation. The only thing
that seems certain these days is that
the state's getting a little bit less
and less each year.
To quantify the exact gap between water
rights, or what's allocated out by the
state, against how much water the state
naturally produces a year, a study in
2014 at UC Davis, requiring archival
research digging through all the old
rights, found that the state allocates
about 370 million acre-feet a year, but
a good precipitation year only produces
about 70 million acre-feet. California
has allocated rights to an incredible
five times more water than it can
actually produce,
>> [music]
>> creating a major structural deficit. And
because of the system of prior
appropriations, whoever has more junior
water rights is going to be the first to
lose out. Given that these can often be
urban municipalities that are growing
and just trying to keep up with demand,
that means that places with the people
are more likely to lose out.
Now, in practice, cities have yet to get
cut. Even in the worst of droughts,
California has yet to actually run out
of water.
>> [music]
>> But the margins are getting finer, and
the closer the call, the more scrutiny
the other side of California gets.
California is far more than two major
coastal urban areas. It's also an
agrarian heartland. Almost all leafy
greens produced in the US in the winter
months come from the Imperial Valley,
but the state's Central Valley, through
which the California Aqueduct runs,
produces 99% of the US's almonds and 40%
of the nation's fruits and nuts across
just 1% of the nation's total
agricultural land. Just as Southern
California is the perfect place to live,
the Central Valley is the perfect place
to grow high-value crops. 300 sunny days
a year, the highest quality soil, and
temperatures that vary wildly from
daytime and night, which increases sugar
content in fruit. But again, a familiar
limitation, water.
Now, it's easy to romanticize the plight
of the farmer here. They got to the
water first, took the risk, built their
life, livelihood, and family around the
water, and are now potentially going to
get bullied out of it by a bunch of
soulless cities. But, it looks a little
different on the ground.
By and large, this is big industrial
[music] agriculture. The most notable
Central Valley brands make this clear.
POM Pomegranates, Wonderful Almonds and
Pistachios, Halos Clementines. All
recognizable brands on their own right
for the average American consumer. But,
all are actually the same company, The
Wonderful Company, which also owns Fiji
Water, Justin Wines, Teleflora, and
Wonderful Citrus. This is far from
mom-and-pop farming. And while the
controlling Resnick family are major
movers in the philanthropy space,
questions linger around the authenticity
of their efforts, as well as the means
through which they've been able to
accumulate so much water for their own
commercial use to begin with. The
Wonderful Company, its operations and
the ensuing questions, centers here in
Kern County. It's in Shafter where they
have run much of their distribution, and
it's over here where some of their
philanthropic efforts have taken stage.
In the unincorporated community of Lost
Hills, where half of the 95% Hispanic
population draws its paychecks from The
Wonderful Company, some see generosity,
while others see the remnants of the
company town labor structure that's gone
by the wayside in much of the rest of
the country. Scanning the city explains
why. Moving north from the Almond
Village Apartments built on land donated
by The Wonderful Company, there's the
Wonderful Preschool neighboring the
wonderful college prep academy. North of
that, there's the wonderful bridge that
crosses the highway and connects the
town to the wonderful park and the
wonderful soccer field adorned with the
wonderful logo. Whether altruistic or
labor controlling, what's of more
importance to the larger water picture
is what lies
>> [music]
>> beneath Kern County.
What makes the Wonderful Empire possible
is in part the Kern County Water Bank. A
partially natural underground structure
that holds about 1.5 million acre-feet
or 500 billion gallons of water. That's
the amount of water that the Colorado
Aqueduct could pump in a year at maximum
capacity or the amount of water promised
to the entire country of Mexico annually
from the Colorado River. Of all that
storage, the Resnicks own 57%
of it. This, along with more senior
water rights along the state's surface
water, gives Wonderful access to more
water than what every house in Los
Angeles uses in a year combined. And the
process through which they gained
ownership of so much of the state's
water is at best a bit opaque.
The Resnicks were able to acquire this
share of the water bank through the 1994
Monterey Amendments. The result of quiet
negotiations between the State's
Department of Water Resources and a
collection of private entities along the
State Water Project whose junior water
rights [music] were increasingly
threatened by persistent drought. The
two parties struck a deal, ownership
over the yet to be completed water bank
transferred from the state to the
private [music] entities in exchange for
the retirement of the junior water
rights that strained the state project.
[music] The deal also struck out the
project's urban preference rule that
said water would be delivered first to
urban municipalities in times of
drought. The trade-off, the quiet nature
of the deal, and the removal of urban
preference has led some to label the
transfer as an underhanded rip-off to
California residents for the sake of a
single institution. While the optics are
bad, others say it was a fairer deal
given the context. What's less
subjective is that the bank [music]
helped the Resnick agricultural empire
expand to what it is today, and it
allows them the flexibility and
confidence to plant high revenue cash
[music] crops that happen to be
extremely water intensive without
consideration of urban Californian needs
at all. And it's taken what was a
state-owned water bank that stores a
commodity that exists in the public
trust and turned it into a profit
generator for a billionaire family when
it sells that water to urban areas in
need. The Resnicks alone aren't the
cause for California's constant water
stream, but they're the best example as
to how the system inadvertently [music]
benefits well-resourced agribusinesses.
They're able to lobby and sway policy
makers, invest heavily in projects at
the Kern water bank that are certain to
strengthen their water holdings in the
long game, and use their scale to eat up
a bigger and bigger portion of the water
supply. They're able to turn
California's inherent positive
attributes, [music]
its first-class soils and prime
temperatures, to grow crops that happen
to be some of the most water intensive
without any consideration as to who or
how many could make use of that same
resource. But the problem transcends
billionaire almond farmers entirely.
Statewide, agriculture accounts for 80%
of all water use, no matter how wealthy
the farmer.
And yet, agriculture only accounts for
2.5% of the state's economy. Here,
heritage is running right into
efficiency. And yet, the problem is more
broad than just agriculture against
urban, too. Ultimately, it's a
combination of sloppy math, a systemic
belief that all water can and ought to
get put to work, and a use-it-or-lose-it
mentality that ensures water is always a
top issue in California. It may be less
pronounced in the less and less common
periods of comparative abundance, but
should a multi-decade wet period
persist, the state, the cities, and the
farmers will identify it eventually as
the new norm, putting the water to use
as if it's going to be like that every
year. And in the far more likely future
reality, as the fires get worse, the
summers drier, the wet period shorter,
the snowpack [music] more scant, it's a
state that's rife for a reckoning. Does
the water serve best the people or the
plants? Does this new future rely on new
rules or the rules that got the state to
this position [music] in the first
place?
What is very much figured out on the
other hand is what you should watch next
or at least put on your list. And that's
Day Pass, hosted by Jason from Not Just
Bikes. Day Pass is a Nebula original,
meaning it exists only on the streaming
service that myself and a host of other
creators put together called Nebula. Day
Pass being a Nebula original also means
that it rocks. It's a show that takes
what Jason loves and knows best, public
transit and travel, and unleashes him to
explore cities through the lens of
public transit. It's a concept that a
lot of people put a lot of thought into.
It's a project backed by a bigger budget
than what's usually possible on YouTube,
and it's a project that Jason and the
whole Nebula team is really excited
about. If you're a fan of anything we
make over here at Wendover, then the
crossover appeal is really natural here.
But rather than us leaning on maps and
explanations from above to talk about
transit, Jason's really out there
experiencing and critiquing it all from
the ground. It's travel meets transit.
Day Pass is the new fancy edition, but
there is just so much good stuff on
Nebula right now. If you like content
produced by our team, well, we have a
lot up there right now from Abolish
Everything, a comedy debate premise
recorded live in New York, to Scav, a
docu-series tracing the drama and
outrageous unfoldings of the country's
largest annual scavenger hunt at the
University of Chicago. Beyond us, Joseph
from RealLifeLore is producing great
stuff with his Mad King series, while
Joe Scott's Oldest and Newest Places on
Earth serves as an awfully compelling
full-length documentary that blends a
lot of cool geology with some pretty
extreme travel to go see it all. I could
keep going, but just trust that every
month that goes by the Nebula catalog
gets a bit deeper, making being a
subscriber only a bit better. But we
need you all to keep the cycle going. We
have a deal running right now that when
you use our link, nebula.tv/wendover,
you'll get a whole 50% off a Nebula
subscription, which brings the cost down
to just $30 for the entire year. As
streaming seems to only get more
expensive, this is a screaming deal. So,
give us a shot, and thank you for
supporting this channel and all the
other creators building out Nebula with
awesome content.